The tape is now on. Okay. In the early to middle 1960s, the so-called new wave
hit science fiction. What did you think of it then, and did it have any
influence on your style? I, to tell you the truth, I was completely confused by
the new wave. It had been going for some time before I was aware of what it was.
I had read some stories that seemed very strange to me.
And then I finally became, you see, I was very well isolated. I was almost,
because I was close to, because I had to keep close to newspaper work, I never
got very far away from home. I was almost never in New York where the real
ferment of all was going on.
But I didn't get as angry or as contemptuous over the new wave as many writers
did. I felt sure that it was just one of the evolutionary things that do happen
occasionally in science fiction, and indeed in any form of literature.
I felt certain that the new wave as such would die out after time. And I hoped
that it would have some beneficial impact on science fiction writing. And in
fact it did. I think that after reading some of the material, especially that
that came out of Britain, that I began to feel that there might be room for
somewhat better writing than some of us have been doing, myself included. And
apparently a number of other people, whether influenced by the new wave or not,
apparently thought the same thing. Because I think that from the time, around
the time the new wave was beginning to die out, that you did begin to see far
more attention to good writing than there had ever been before in the science
fiction field. So, science fiction survived the new wave and benefited from it.
And I suspect that in the years to come, there will be other innovations, other
evolutionary factors
that will be called not new wave, but something else, that may raise a great
deal of controversy, but that science fiction will keep on and probably will
benefit by all of it.
You continue to produce both novels and short stories. I produce very few short
stories, and almost all my time has taken up for a novel. Although I hope that
within the next few years, that I'll be able to write more short stories,
there's nothing quite as satisfactory as writing a good short story. You can't
spend the time, nor the effort, on making a novel shine the way you can make a
short story shine. You can polish it up, you can glean just like a gem. With a
novel, you can't do that. So, I'm pleased, particularly, to see a number of the
magazines hanging in there, because they are giving young writers a chance to
begin their writing career and to polish up the art before they go on to
something longer, into the book market, for example.
When you write, what are the mechanics of your writing? Have you brought a word
processor, or do you still write it out, or type it, or what? I write up my
wrong hand because I, my hand grows slower writing wrong hand than it would on a
typewriter. I write too fast. I get ahead of myself on a typewriter. By writing
wrong hand, I can keep pace with my mind, and I do a better job of writing in
wrong hand. When I finish with, when I've written a few chapters in wrong hand,
by then I run them to the typewriter, making changes and selections and
revisions as I go along, and that is my finished topic. That's the second that's
when I draft.
You've won the major awards, including a very recent one for the short story.
The one I want to ask you about is the Grandmaster Nebula. I would think that it
would be very gratifying to receive an award of this stature from your peers,
not from the fans, but from your peers. That was. I had some. I had never
expected to get it. I was very pleased to get it. It is. It is a recognition of
your standing as an author by the people who themselves are authors. Yes. It
doesn't depend on popularity. It doesn't depend on momentary success. It
depends. It represents a lifetime achievement. and it's rated by people who are
well-qualified to looking at that kind of achievement. It was, I was extremely,
extremely pleased. I'm very proud of it. when you started writing science
fiction in the 1930s, did you dream that your work would last and that your work
in science fiction in general would reach the level of popularity that it seems
to enjoy now? Not at all. Never for a moment. We were working in the ghetto.
There were very few of us.
science fiction was read by only a handful. When you met somebody and they found
out you were a science fiction writer, they'd say, how to get those crazy ideas.
I went thinking around hoping nobody would notice you.
you were the bottom of the heap. There's no question about it. You were much
more despicable within maybe the pornographic letters of today. But we kept at
it because we liked it. Because I think after a few years of it, I began to feel
that probably it would develop and it might have been a science fiction. But I
never dreamed that we would be putting out as great and as good a progress as we
have. A large percentage of the fiction titles that are sold today are science
fiction. And science fiction is beginning to dominate both the movie screen and
television. We are writing the quest of the way and I hope the quest continues
to rise. I see no reason why it shouldn't.
do you manage to read any science fiction or any other fiction in between all
your writing joints? I read some science fiction and I try to keep up with
science fiction. I try to it's impossible to read all the science fiction that
is being put out. I think you would get total vision if you did. you'd get a
good many confusing signals if you did. I read a lot for information. I am a
history buff with emphasis on the Civil War and the settlement of our country
and I have a few favorite authors. Steinbeck, Hemingway, Thomas Lewis.
read over and over again. I have had
I've had proofs on my desk from way way back and barely a week goes past that I
don't read a few pages of proofs simply for the beautiful writing at the man's
end. Is that correct?
Yes. You mentioned way back when we were talking about the city stories that you
got disillusioned with the plight of man and you alluded to it a couple of other
times. how do you view technology and man's place in it and what man's future is
going to be with all this technology?
That's a hard thing. I think that we have become octogen to technology. That
we're using technology to dehumanize ourselves.
I understand and admit that we must have higher and ever higher technology
to make ourselves to make possible a better life.
After all medical technology has saved many lives. I can remember the time when
people were sick with chicken pox, dipteria were terrestre and were diseases that made
everyone cringe. I can remember the polio epidemic that we had every summer. we
still have heart disease and we have cancer but one of these things we're going
to look at. We have a make wage and communication.
we now can listen to stars thousands of light years distance millions of light
years distance. We have gone out to most of the planets in the solar
system and in a few years one of our unmaned boats would be going out and
entering space beyond the solar system. All of this is fine and it's necessary
but I do have a feeling that we are being overwhelmed by technology. I am
considerably uncomfortable with the electronics that we're getting to computers.
I can see the day when we will abolish money and that we will do all our
business by computers.
it's going to hurt us. It's going to hurt us in the end. And still you can't
stop technology because of those things. You can see it and I'm confused.
I don't think you're the only one. You are one of the few who will admit it but
I don't think you're the only one. We're back off from being so heavy now.
Looking back on your body of works what are some of your favorite works that
you've done?
Most people if you ask what my favorite work was would say City. And I'm pleased
that most people would say that. But I think that I have written better works
than city. I think that Way Station choice of thought maybe Project Hope are
among my better works. The Visitors was a good story.
It's hard to say which work you think is best. Even after some years after I've
written I'm still puzzled by which piece of work I do think is my best ever.
How do you want to be remembered as a writer?
I don't know if I will be remembered. But if I'm to be remembered as a writer
I'd like to be remembered as someone who wrote honestly and who is more
concerned with the heart and mind of humanity than humanity's achievements.
That seems like a good place to end but I want to ask you one more question.
What do you have in the works? Should we expect to see a couple books a year out
of you now for a while? You must realize I'm getting old. My good health has
partially deserted me. I don't have the strength to have before. I still write
almost every day. I sit down to desk and do some work but I don't do as much of
it as I used to. work. I think that the two books a year is at the end and
probably I should be satisfied with one book a year. In September a new book of
mine, a fantasy where the evil of wells will be put out by Del Ray. I rather
work to see progress. I'm somewhat better than halfway through
Mr. Simak, we look forward to a lot more. I would hope that I could give you a
lot more. I'm going to do the best I can. How's this all sound?
How did record? You have no way of knowing how to record. Oh, the recording is
fine. The engineer can listen to the recording while we're talking. Oh, I see.
And he says it sounds fine. So, no problem. It sounds like your cold deserted
you at least for a little while. Well, the cold held off.
I haven't got it yet. It's just beginning to sneak up on me. And if I can take
enough aspirin and drink enough orange juice, I may skid pastel out. Well, I'm a
firm believer in vitamin C, so I'll prescribe that for you. I think it works.
Is that it? That's pretty much good it covered. Mr. Simak? Yes? This is David
Carson. I was listening in there. I don't think I'd worry about not being
remembered if I are you. I think some of your works are extremely memorable and
will be around for as long as words are in print. Thank you very much. Mr.
Simak, we sure appreciate the chance to get to interview you. And as I said,
when we make the shows, we'll get you copies of them and you'll see what you
sound like. If you would, I'd appreciate it. You bet. There was a strong group
sitting around, I understand this, isn't it? Mm-hmm. I want to say hello to them
and thank them for being there. Thank you. Nice talking to you, Mr. Simak. Good
night now. Good night.